.TH WAYNAV 1 "2026-06-06" "waynav" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
waynav \- grid-based keyboard mouse navigation for Wayland
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY waynav
.OP \-c path
.OP \-l level
.OP \-v
.OP \-h
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B waynav
is a short-lived, grid-based mouse navigator for Wayland compositors.
It is intended to be launched by a compositor key binding.  When
started, it creates a fullscreen overlay, grabs the keyboard, draws the
current grid region, handles key bindings from
.IR waynavrc ,
and moves or clicks the pointer through the Wayland virtual-pointer
protocol.
.PP
The process exits when a configured binding runs the
.B end
command.  There is no daemon, IPC, or saved state between invocations.
A lock file prevents multiple instances from running at the same time.
.PP
waynav targets wlroots-compatible compositors and relies on
wlr-layer-shell, wlr-virtual-pointer, wp-fractional-scale, wp-viewporter,
and xdg-output.  It has been tested on niri.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fIpath\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR \fIpath\fR
Read configuration from
.IR path .
If this option is not given,
.B waynav
tries
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/waynav/waynavrc
and then
.IR ~/.config/waynav/waynavrc .
.TP
\fB\-l\fR \fIlevel\fR, \fB\-\-log\fR \fIlevel\fR
Set the log level.  Valid levels are
.BR error ,
.BR warn ,
.BR info ,
and
.BR debug .
The default is
.BR info .
This option overrides
.IR WAYNAV_LOG .
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print a short usage message and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file uses keynav-style bindings.  Blank lines are
ignored.  A
.B #
character starts a comment, even inside command text.
.PP
The special line
.PP
.EX
clear
.EE
.PP
removes normal key bindings parsed so far.
.PP
Normal bindings have this form:
.PP
.EX
keysequence command[,command...]
.EE
.PP
A
.I keysequence
is a key name with optional modifiers separated by
.BR + .
Recognized modifiers are
.BR shift ,
.BR ctrl ,
.BR control ,
.BR alt ,
and
.BR super .
The final token is resolved by xkbcommon, so use symbolic key names such
as
.BR h ,
.BR space ,
.BR semicolon ,
or
.BR Return .
Because keysyms are resolved after modifiers are applied, shifted
bindings should use the shifted keysym, for example
.B shift+H
rather than
.BR shift+h .
.PP
Command chains are comma-separated and contain at most eight commands.
The first command
.B start
is special: the rest of that chain is stored as startup commands and is
run once after the overlay is created, not when a key is pressed.  The
key sequence on a start line is kept for compatibility with keynav-style
configuration; activation is handled by the compositor binding that
launches
.BR waynav .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B start
Mark a startup command chain.  Only meaningful as the first command on a
binding line.
.TP
.B end
Release any active drag and exit.
.TP
.BI grid " n"
Set the current grid to
.IR n \(mu n .
.TP
.BI grid " cols" x rows
Set the current grid to
.IR cols \(mu rows .
.TP
.BI cell\-select " n"
Select cell
.I n
from the current grid.  Cells are numbered top-to-bottom within a column,
then left-to-right across columns.  In a 4-by-4 grid, cell 1 is the
upper-left cell, cell 4 is the lower-left cell, and cell 5 is the top
cell of the second column.
.TP
.BR cut\-left | cut\-right | cut\-up | cut\-down
Halve the current region, keeping the named side.
.TP
.BR move\-left | move\-right | move\-up | move\-down
Move the current region by one region width or height in the named
direction.
.TP
.B warp
Move the pointer to the center of the current region.
.TP
.BI click " button"
Click a button.  Button numbers follow keynav: 1 is left, 2 is middle,
3 is right, 4 scrolls up, and 5 scrolls down.
.TP
.BI drag " button"
Toggle a drag with button 1, 2, or 3.  When starting a drag,
.B waynav
warps to the center of the current region and presses the button.  The
next
.B drag
command releases it.  The
.B end
command also releases an active drag.
.TP
.BI cursorzoom " size"
Set the current region to a
.IR size \(mu size
rectangle centered on the current region's center.
.TP
.BI cursorzoom " width height"
Set the current region to a
.IR width \(mu height
rectangle centered on the current region's center.
.TP
.B history\-back
Restore the previous region.
.TP
.BI shell " command"
.TQ
.BI sh " command"
Run
.I command
asynchronously with
.BR /bin/sh " " \-c .
If the command text is wrapped in one pair of single quotes, those quotes
are stripped before execution.  Commands are fire-and-forget; waynav does
not wait for them to finish.
.SH EXAMPLES
A compositor binding for niri:
.PP
.EX
Mod+semicolon { spawn "waynav"; }
.EE
.PP
A small working
.IR waynavrc :
.PP
.EX
clear
super+semicolon start,grid 2x2

q cell-select 1,warp
w cell-select 2,warp
a cell-select 3,warp
s cell-select 4,warp

h move-left,warp
j move-down,warp
k move-up,warp
l move-right,warp

space warp,click 1
BackSpace history-back
semicolon end
Return end
.EE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.I WAYNAV_LOG
Default log level when
.B \-l
is not used.
.TP
.I WAYNAV_LOG_COLOR
Set to
.B 1
to force colored log output.  Set to any other value to disable color.
If unset, color is enabled when stderr is a terminal.
.TP
.I XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory used to find
.IR waynav/waynavrc .
.TP
.I HOME
Fallback base directory used to find
.IR .config/waynav/waynavrc .
.TP
.I XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Directory for
.IR waynav.lock .
If unset,
.I /tmp
is used.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/waynav/waynavrc
Primary default configuration path.
.TP
.I ~/.config/waynav/waynavrc
Fallback default configuration path.
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/waynav.lock
Lock file used to avoid concurrent instances.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit, help or version output, or another instance already running.
.TP
.B 1
Configuration, overlay setup, or runtime error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR keynav (1)
